# Salon - GPT-driven Tweets of Historical Figures

Salon is an AI-powered project that generates tweets of renowned historical figures like Aristotle, Einstein, and Gandhi using GPT models. By leveraging Langchain and embeddings of speeches and books authored by these figures, Salon generates tweets inspired by news articles of the day.

## Key Features

* GPT-driven tweet generation for historical figures
* Trained on speeches and books of famous personalities
* Tweets generated based on news articles
* Uses Langchain, Emdedding lookup

## Training Process
1. All books/ interviews are in the `training` directory in markdown files. 
2. Run `yarn train` or `npm train` to set up the vector store.
3. Tweet Generation is prompt in `lib/tweetPrompt.js`
4. Run index.js, and start playing around with it!

## Examples

Here are some example tweets generated by Salon:

Diogenes: "The collapse of Silicon Valley Bank is a reminder that greed can bring down even the mightiest institutions. But why do we focus on punishing the corrupt, rather than educating them? We need good men, not corpses."

Hitler: "The collapse of a bank is just a small piece in the puzzle of our current catastrophe. It is not just an economic crisis, but also a political and moral one. Let us not focus solely on economy, but on personal leadership and the importance of blood and race. "

Da Vinci: "Nothing is more to be feared than ill fame. The man who threatened the President and Vice President on YouTube is a prime example. Let justice be served and let us not forget the power of our words."


## Contributing

Your contributions are always welcome! Please feel free to submit a new feature request, report bugs or improve documentation.


## License

MIT 


Based on: https://github.com/Conner1115/LangChain.js-LLM-Template
